How I Transitioned from Academia To the Data Science Industry | by Skanda Vivek | Towards Data ScienceOpen in appSign upSign InWriteSign upSign InPublished inTowards Data ScienceSkanda VivekFollowJul 8, 2022·9 min read·Member-onlySaveHow I Transitioned from Academia To the Data Science IndustryOne day I realized it was time for a new adventure. Here’s how small consistent efforts laid the foundations for my next role.https://pxhere.com/en/photo/1284568I want to share my experiences in transitioning from academia to data science as it might benefit many in a similar boat. More broadly, my experiences could also help lay a solid foundation for achieving your goals —in transitioning to a completely different field.I’ve always wanted to be a scientist since I was probably 10. Since many close family members were scientists in academia — getting a PhD, then a postdoc, and finally being a professor were my goals. This goal was more a pie in the sky for many years as I was a horrible student in school. But all that changed once I started having fun solving advanced physics and calculus problems while my friends were more concerned about grades, and not the subject. I made up my mind in undergrad to follow my dreams and be a physicist.After that it was relatively smooth sailing through a combination of hard work and dedication, as well as my natural creative inclination to find solve research problems. I did a masters in a prestigious IIT in India, PhD at Emory University, postdoc at GeorgiaTech. All indicators seemed good that I was on the right track. During my PhD. I was awarded the best graduate student award by the physics department at Emory, published a first author paper in PNAS, and had many other coauthor publications. During my postdoc I was awarded the best speaker in robotics related research at the GeorgiaTech postdoc symposium, and my work was featured across Forbes, BBC, etc. I’m giving this context to show how I was focused on the track to academia, and why it is important to enjoy what you are doing in the moment.Finally, I landed a faculty position at Georgia Gwinnett College — an undergraduate college in the Atlanta area. I enjoyed my time there with the freedom to teach a course I created, and choose research projects as well as own most of my time. Towards the end of my 3rd year at GGC I decided it was time for a change. One month later I landed a new job as a Senior Data Scientist. That doesn’t mean that I only prepared for a month however. Here I talk about how my efforts over the past 3 years acted as stepping stones to my journey.Research using DataI’ve always been super interested in understanding patterns in the world. So when I had sometime for developing an independent research project as a postdoc, I thought to explore traffic patterns as a physics problem. Eventually we came up with one of the first estimates of how traffic patterns would break-up in the aftermath of a cyber-attack. For this project I explored a bunch of traffic data- including data from Google, HERE API, NYC taxi data, Open Street Map, etc. I also developed a simple algorithm to track vehicle speeds from a local camera.While none of the data science methodologies I used in these projects was ground breaking, it gave me hands-on experiences in data extraction, cleaning, and some basic Machine Learning in real-world contexts.Data Incubator FellowshipI did an 8 week intense remote data science fellowship. At the time I was more interested in academia but in case I didn’t find an academic position I wanted data science as the next option. I got a bunch of interviews from the fellowship program, and almost an offer. My capstone project was also highlighted during pitch night. Ultimately I decided not to pursue an onsite visit at a company based in Chicago as my wife had just given birth to our twins a few days earlier, and I just landed my academic professor job at GGC. The most important thing about this fellowship was that it exposed me to peers most of whom chose data science after the fellowship and gave me an overview of the technical skills and requirements for an entry level data scientist. Another aspect that cannot be understated is the psychological edge it brought me.Before TDI I felt like a physicist who was skilled in python. After TDI I felt like a data scientist.This was back in 2019, but the mindset has since stuck.BloggingMy first article on Medium was back in October 2019 — What if the next large-scale hack involved your vehicle instead of your security camera? It did dismally for a month, racking 20 views or so. But then I did not know about submitting to larger publications. An editor from The Startup (then Medium’s largest publication) reached out to me to publish this article. After that I consistently continued to publish in top Medium publications especially Towards Data Science.Publishing and sharing my work with the larger Data Science community has helped me stand out during the job interview process.Consulting, Tutoring, MentoringI started reading stories of how people were selling Data Science services on platforms like Fiverr and Upwork. In parallel, I had also dabbled with creating tutor accounts on common tutoring platforms during my PhD — even though I had never really followed up on it.As I was experimenting in online platforms I stumbled upon this great need for data science tutoring. So many universities and colleges have started to offer data science masters programs, and undergrad specializations. I got a few good students who valued my tutoring sessions and gave me good ratings. As the hours and ratings piled up, I increased my hourly rate. Surprisingly I found that as I increased my rate — the requests did not dramatically decrease. In fact I was getting students from top universities like Harvard, Columbia, Berkely, etc. I even tutored someone whose father is a tech CEO of a top 20 Fortune 500 company for a semester. I also landed a longer term client who was consulting with me on developing an image object detection platform.Skanda VivekI also had some success on Fiverr.Skanda VivekConsulting and tutoring helped me get paid for learning advanced Machine Learning techniques and helping clients achieve their goals.Interview, interview, interview…My Data Science consulting and tutoring experiences made me a bit nervous as I was deciding to transition. I thought surely, there must be tons of applicants on the job market — given every college or university seems to be starting a DS program.Cologne, Germany: A flock of sheep with shepherd dogs and a black sheep at Cologne Southbridge (Kölner Südbrücke) | Original by CEphoto, Uwe AranasHowever, it was only during my interviews in March — April 2022 that I realized two things:A. There were a record number of job openings that time (inflation was not yet a concern)B. Everyone who claims to be a data scientist or who has a data science degree is not competent.The latter is actually obvious in hindsight. I was tutoring so many students from top universities, who didn’t have a clue what they were doing.An encounter with a recruiter taught me that interviews are like doing reps at the gym. Do more, and you get better at it. Interviews are the most important part of the job search process. The only way you get better at interviewing is by doing more interviews!Don’t be afraid to failIt is natural to hold back on interviewing until you feel ready. But if you are like me — you might never feel 100% ready. And that is the danger — of settling into a comfort zone and making excuses about why it is not the right time.I almost lost my voice due to an unrelated flu illness passing around my kids daycare. I applied to jobs with CV mistakes. But I still interviewed, even though at times my throat did not cooperate. I fixed my CV and made it more appealing when I wasn’t getting interviews for a week. After that recruiters reached out to me.One of the worst and most morally devastating tools I found was Jobscan. I haven’t heard anyone say negative things about Jobscan — but it did not work for me. Jobscan scans your resume and the job posting and gives a matching score. I never got above 20 or 30% from the Jobscan system — and they suggested applying only when you have a score of 70% or higher. If I had done that, I would have been tailoring my CV to this day! Now that I got the job I bet I would get a higher score from Jobscan as I have the job on my CV (thanks a lot Jobscan…).Document everything you don’t blog aboutIf you follow Ali Abdaal’s Youtube channel — you will see that he was incredibly successful in med school, and at the same time made it big as a YouTuber. One of his productivity tools is intense note taking using Notion. I use Notion to consolidate my DS learnings; especially in the context of job interviews. It isn’t very structured, but does the job.My Data Science Notion Database | Skanda VivekClosing ThoughtsBecoming an ‘expert’ at something new is more than having one specific goal, and achieving it. For me at least, the journey was much more important than the final destination. Think about it — if you decide on a goal and reach it, what will you do once it is reached? It is more likely that in the absence of future plans that you might crash and burnout. Also, big goals can change from day to day. What if you were to suddenly decide on a goal for where you should be next year, and and change your mind tomorrow?On the other hand, if you are in a constant journey and enjoying every moment; any destination is a step along the way. Creating positive habits is more likely to weather an ever changing mind. If you decide to blog every week and make it through 9 weeks, you are less likely to quit in the tenth week. You might take a break — but it is easier to get back into the zone after. After 30 blogs, recruiters might reach out to you, and you get an interview where you talk about your blogs, and land a dream job.Compare this with creating a goal of transitioning to a data science job one year later, and not putting in consistent efforts. That could be an unrealistic goal especially if you can’t show someone you have relevant experience. This neat psychological mindshift is also phrased in other ways by many successful people.As Maria Sharapova said:“The mission I was on was very different. It wasn’t that I had or didn’t have to be a champion. It was that I was learning and growing to be a better tennis player.” — Maria SharapovaRavikanth Naval says:“Be impatient with actions but patient with results.” — Naval RavikantIn the book Tiny Habits, B.J. Fogg discusses how small focused daily activities can lead to hugely positive impacts on your life.Finally, if you have a positive attitude towards your transformation and make the necessary efforts — whether it is blogging, publishing your research, consulting, writing a book, posting on social media, taking the time to be creative, etc. you are making the best possible investment decision — investing in your health and success, no matter whether you reach your originally intended destination, or find something even more awesome that you could not have imagined.If you are not yet a Medium member and want to support writers like me, feel free to sign-up through my referral link: https://skanda-vivek.medium.com/membershipFollow me if you liked this article — I frequently write at the interface of data science, security, physics, and society.For weekly data-based perspectives subscribe here!Data ScienceAcademiaTransitionsLife LessonsChange----More from Towards Data ScienceFollowYour home for data science. A Medium publication sharing concepts, ideas and codes.Read more from Towards Data ScienceAboutHelpTermsPrivacyGet the Medium appSkanda Vivek926 FollowersSenior Data Scientist in NLP. Building and shipping AI based products.FollowHelpStatusWritersBlogCareersPrivacyTermsAboutText to speech



































